Title: Developers make the best data scientists
Author: Spencer Nelson
Date: 2013-09-03 10:20:00
Slug: developers-make-best-data-scientists

There are a lot of paths people take to become data nerds. You've got the academics, PhD students disillusioned with the publication process or departmental politics; they usually bring a lot of knowledge about high-powered techniques to wring the most value possible out of data. There are some MBA-ish types who would be called 'analysts' at most companies; they usually distinguish themselves with an ability to ask the right questions. And then you have the software engineers, often ex-web developers, who can write up scripts to do analysis in a flash and can easily navigate across systems to collect data themselves.

Out of these, I think that the hacker's skill set is the most valuable, at least if you're working in a technical, engineering-focused startup (as opposed to, say, a large [retail corporation](http://www.bigdatarepublic.com/author.asp?section_id=2635&doc_id=265574) or a bank). The ability to write quality code is essential, and it's an ability which comes mostly from experience - especially from experience working on a team with other engineers, reading and working on code together, learning from experience how to weave maintainable systems. I'm a little biased since this is my own background, but I think it has helped immensely in five ways.

### 1. collecting and munging data
You probably have a great wealth of data in your systems, but getting it out is not so simple. There are Nginx logs mixed in with Rails logs, there are multiple different Postgres installations with different versions, and the accounting team only uses Excel files with internal references to manage everything - this is not a particularly dramatic case, this is the usual pattern at most companies. Successfully corralling all of this into a maintainable state takes significant hacker gumption. Web development is outstandingly good training for dealing with the insanity of multiple standards and multiple data formats.

Skill in this area translates into much better efficiency in answering questions, since one can pull data down for analysis quicker, as well as more robust analysis, since cleaning data correctly usually requires a lot of understanding about the subtleties of data sources. Certain facts like the possibility of null values in a SQL column can cause a lot of pain for someone who is not expecting them - especially if that someone is not experienced in dealing with multifarious data sources.

### 2. building systems to collect new data
At some point, you will have a question which is unanswerable with your existing stable of data sources. You will need to add logging or tracking or monitoring systems to capture events, and you will need to store these data in some format that will be extensible to later changes and easy to digest. Careful planning for your data tracking systems really pays off, but a data scientist with a not-so-technical background like the aforementioned academic or MBA will not know how to do this, or even that they should do this. Two months later: lots of pain when you've added *another* idiosyncratic logging system. 

The alternative is to allocate engineering resources towards building tracking systems. This is very, very expensive - engineers these days are precious, and they will not find writing logging code very rewarding. The added layer of distance between the data scientists and the data sources will bring confusion later when unexpected quirks surface, too. And realistically you will *always* be expanding your data sources, so this route would require permanently allocating engineers to write logging code, which is definitely inefficient. Much better would be to have data scientists who can add logging themselves (albeit within the bounds of code review).

### 3. exploratory data analysis
[John Tukey](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Tukey), one of the giants of statistics, was a strong advocate of the practice of *exploratory data analysis*. His argument was pretty good: conventional statistics relies too much on hypothesis testing and 'statistical significance', whatever that means, and not enough on rapid exploration of the data to discover interesting potential hypotheses.

Most of the time I find myself answering questions that are basically exploratory: "is chat retention important?", "do different games have different viewership patterns?", and so on. These require a fluid analyst who is able to quickly move through the data, flowing across different data sources and swiveling numbers from one format to another. This process, of course, requires very strong knowledge of some programming environment; ideally, the transformation and visualization of the data is practically intuitive and flies by at the speed of thought. I use [IPython](http://ipython.org/) for this and cannot imagine anything better, although I occasionally dip into R for niche tasks. The point is that it requires deep familiarity with some programming language - the sort of familiarity that comes from working on code full-time.

### 4. turning questions into scripts
There aren't many true one-off questions that I encounter. In general, an organization will have a few key questions that it wants answered over and over again. This fact has been so consistent that it is a basic principle: every question will be asked ten times, but every time slightly differently. And the differences are significant enough that, if you are not careful, you'll have to repeat a significant amount of work.

Someone will ask you to collect retention stats on users from Brazil. You're crazy if you don't make this a general script for retention stats by country. Even better would be to make it a script for pulling retention stats by any demographic - a tool that lets you split out information based on certain descriptors of the user population. These improvements aren't luxuries, they're vital. Without them, analysis will choke on doing things by hand. Keeping scripts maintainable is important for the long-term health of your data team, since you're guaranteed to be reusing them in all sorts of ways over and over. 

### 5. turning scripts into dashboards
Of course, the next step is to take that retention-stats-by-demographic tool and put it directly in the hands of nontechnical users. This is where the value of an engineer-turned-data-scientist really kicks in - when data is available in a dashboard to let *anyone* explore, then data analysis can finally become a routine part of all decision-making. This is the jewel that we all drool over: when exploratory data analysis is a tool in everyone's belt, people can build amazing things.

If the data nerd wasn't previously a developer, then this is probably way over his head. But if they have the experience, it really isn't so hard: a lightweight web application can do almost anything these days. With Flask and d3, interactive dashboards that let nontechnical users surf through live data are not that hard to build, and they can be astonishingly rewarding. Turning one data scientist into a [culture of data](|filename|/data_science_culture) starts with here - you amplify analytics dramatically with this fusion of data science and development.

## is this still a data scientist we're talking about?
I'm not sure that there's a word for exactly this person. It's possible that this goes beyond what the LinkedIn crew were describing when they [popularized 'data science'](http://radar.oreilly.com/2011/09/building-data-science-teams.html) as a term. 

But it doesn't really matter - whatever this is, this fusion of developer and data scientist, it's really *really* valuable. Much more valuable, I'd say, than a quant or a stats wonk, at least for most of the startups out there. Keeping scripts high quality, keeping data sources clean, and keeping dashboards fresh should all be high-priority concerns in this data, and those are the sorts of tasks that require dedication and attention, not occasional riffs from engineers.

Discuss at Hacker News: [link](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=6328675)